---
layout: default
title: Annotating Literary History
permalink: annotating-literary-history
---
<!-- Add an essay or interpretive material below this line,
using HTML or markdown.  Do not modify this file above this line -->

  On June 27, 1978, poets Dorothy Livesay, Anne Marriott, and Irving Layton were invited to speak at a panel discussion sponsored and hosted by the English department and Continuing Studies at Simon Fraser University in Burnaby, British Columbia. As part of the Vancouver Heritage Writers’ Festival, a public literary series at the time, their conversation centered on Canadian literary culture and modernist poetry during the 1930s and 1940s. While two other distinguished poets, P. K. Page and F. R. Scott, had originally been invited but were unable to attend the panel, Marriott and Layton were instead asked to speak in their absence.
  In the recording Livesay addresses what she claims to be the unique conditions of “our time”—specifically, the late 1970s when the event was recorded. As she insists, it is “only” in the time of recording, in 1978, that the defining social struggles of the 20s and 30s were being given appropriate historical attention. Following the introduction of the Massey Commission in 1949, an initiative to investigate the state of arts and culture in Canada, the Canada Council of the Arts was created in 1957 to fund the production, study, and dissemination of art and literature on a national scale. In the context of a steadily growing Canadian literary economy, Livesay’s statement about public readings, which had become more scarce during the 1930s, emerged later as a national phenomenon in the 1960s and 1970s, also reflects a renewed understanding of the range of cultural activities through which Canadian literature has been actively defined, critiqued, and re-articulated.

The event also took place within the year following Livesay’s publication of Right Hand, Left Hand: A True Life of the Thirties. Assembled by Livesay, this book is a compilation of essays, letters, and clippings illustrating the cultural and political significance of the period as well as Livesay’s engagements as both a poet and leftist. In the context of the panel discussion, such documents “to be had and found” are given renewed attention, finding a momentary home through the oral exchange between the three poets and their listening audience at SFU in 1978.

Here Livesay, Marriott, and Layton are not only prompted to recount their participation in the literary culture of the 1930s and 1940s, but to re-situate themselves within literary-historical definitions of Canadian modernism and traditionalism by relaying a cohesive narrative that resonates among a listening public of poets and readers in the present of 1978. The SFU poetry reading thus exists as a site of negotiation between the three poets and the audiences that constitute their modernisms within the Canadian literary field and the cultural climate surrounding it. 

Given the retrospective nature of the panel topic, each poet is asked by the event’s facilitator, Sandra Djwa, a professor of English at Simon Fraser University at the time of the recording, to provide a personal introduction followed by a historical overview of a particular period. The three poets then engage in an open discussion and a question-and-answer period with a live listening audience. Livesay, the first speaker, recounts how she began writing in Ontario in the late 20s and continued throughout the 1930s while remaining strongly committed to socialist activism. Marriott elaborates on her experiences growing up on Vancouver Island and her later trip to a farming community in Saskatchewan to stay with relatives, which inspired her to write the celebrated poem, “The Wind Our Enemy.” The poem was first published by the Ryerson Press with the support of Dorothy Livesay’s father, J. F. B. Livesay, in 1939. As one of the most anthologized documentary long poems of the 1930s, “The Wind, Our Enemy” blends aspects of imagism and realism to portray the environmental and social hardships of the prairie region during the Great Depression. Finally, Layton comments on his involvement with First Statement, a Canadian ‘little magazine’ of modernist poetry, and the shifting literary scene in the early 1940s in Montreal.

In their distinct positions as ‘modernist’ Canadian poets, the event simultaneously serves as an occasion to draw strong parallels between them—specifically in terms of their shared contributions to the development of an alternative ‘national’ literature. To frame the event’s literary concerns from a national perspective, Djwa recites the satirical poem titled “The Canadian Authors Meet” by the social democrat and modernist F. R. Scott. Written in 1927, the poem’s gendered, classed, and generational expression of literary politics has been frequently invoked by critics and poets alike to analyze the cultural divergence between the “traditionalists”—also known as the “Victorian” or “Maple Leaf School”— and the emergent “modernists'' in Canada during the 1920s. 

Although Scott had been aware of women poets such as Dorothy Livesay, who had been experimenting with modernist forms throughout the 1920s, the poem is a gendered critique of the anti-modernist aesthetic and political tendencies that Scott associates with the Canadian Authors Association (CAA), a literary group composed mostly of middle-class women in the 1920s and 1930s. As Candida Rifkind illustrates, the poetic preferences of the CAA membership ranged from lamenting the loss of authenticity brought on by the advent of new technologies, and formally conventional works about “home, hearth, and Empire”— such as those written by one of the group’s most popular poets, Edna Jacques—to the aesthetic and social-modernist experimentation of poets such as Livesay and Marriott (8). The poem’s gendered critique of aging bourgeois femininity also represents the “broader masculinist rhetoric” that was characteristic of Canadian socialism during the Depression (Rifkind 11). 

While Scott’s poem not only critiques the traditionalists’ preference for rhyme, metrical forms, and archaic diction, it also draws attention to the values and practices fostered by groups such as the CAA that functioned to overshadow the innovative poetics of some of its members, instead elevating subject matter that adhered to a politically conservative image of Canadian nationalism and “folk” authenticity. In other words, rather than focus its critique on individual poets labouring to replicate traditional forms in isolation, Scott’s satire emphasizes the relationship between the elitist social practices of literary communities in Canada and the conservative aesthetics derided by literary modernists who sought alternative routes to engaging poetically with the question of place and nationality. Along similar lines, Livesay, Marriott, and Layton’s discussion in 1978 highlights the extent to which the various forces of community networks, cultural institutions, and political discourse—both regional and international—are inseparable from an understanding of their personal trajectories as poets.

As Livesay’s statements highlight, the dominant role of print during the 1930s arises in the context of a literary culture marked by a growing concern for the myriad social issues impacting the lives of Canadians in the wake of the Great Depression of 1929, which lasted until Canada declared war on Germany on September 10th, 1939 (Rifkind 5). In her analysis of women writers who formed the Canadian “literary left” in the 1930s, Candida Rifkind writes about a tendency in the history of English-Canadian literary criticism, in which the Depression has often been characterized as a period of cultural drought, caught between the flurry of literary nationalism in the 1920s and the post-war modernism of the 1940s (6). In fact, it was in light of the period’s immense economic hardship and political unrest that literary forms coalesced with the aim of both documenting and transforming social injustices (5). The widespread economic impacts across the country had the unexpected effect of bringing together many professional ‘white collar’ writers and part-time working-class poets in new ways, as they often published alongside each other in the same venues seeking to amplify diverse perspectives. 

While leftist presses, periodicals, and newspapers flourished in place of those arts and publishing venues that had not survived during the Depression, the newspapers, magazines, radio, and theatres that continued to proliferate as avenues for cultural consumption sought to connect with a growing audience for not only poetry, but also plays and short fiction. New media possibilities for mass readership in both Canada and the United States therefore instilled a shift in emphasis from the authors’ literary production to the consumption of poems by potential readers.

Along with this redirection toward social subject matter, socialist-modernist poets such as Livesay focused their energies—to varying effect—on the growing influx of “little magazines,” defined as a type of non-commercial literary, arts, or cultural periodical that emerged alongside the rise of literary modernism in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries (Irvine 4). Rather than reinforce the elitist coterie culture that had already been prevalent within avant-garde modernist circles in North America and Europe, this group worked to establish new avenues of solidarity between middle-class and working-class writers and readers through the techniques of mass marketing, advertising, and self-promotion. Left-leaning little magazine publications, such as Masses (1932-34) and New Frontier (1936-37), however, were short-lived due in part to the lack of national arts funding opportunities. For many modernist and leftists who were, according to Livesay, trying “to get an audience,” there was also frequently a disconnect between an idealized readership, often imagined in terms of ‘the masses,’ ‘the public,’ or ‘the people,’ and the reality of a literary audience made up of ‘self-initiated’ members (Irvine 17-18).

For the Montreal literary scene, Layton highlights how little magazine culture emerged in the 1940s to address the disconnect between the colonial-leaning politics of academic curricula, which elevated canonical British poets, and the wave of modernist literary movements that were taking place in Canada, the United States and Europe. While two of these Montreal-based little magazines, First Statement (1942-5) and Preview (1942-5) had initially different perspectives concerning the ideal trajectory for modernist verse in Canada, together they shared the vision of breaking away from the traditionalist and nationalistic tendencies that had so far characterized mainstream Canadian literary culture. Founded by the poet John Sutherland, First Statement emphasized the need to establish a Canadian literature that could be uniquely its own rather than continue to rely on the influence of other cultures, particularly England. 

While First Statement focused on American influences such as Ezra Pound and William Carlos Williams, Preview, whose editorial board included the poets F. R. Scott, and, later P. K. Page and A. M. Klein, were more interested in the British modernist lineage of poets such as T. S. Eliot and W. B. Yeats. Although both magazines were deeply invested in shaping the direction of Canadian poetry in opposition to the traditionalist ‘old guard,’ Preview’s British cosmopolitan leanings were often viewed as comparatively more exclusionary and conventional by those poets associated with the First Statement group. In the midst of ongoing philosophical tensions, eventually the editorial boards of both magazines merged to create The Northern Review, which ran from 1945–1956.

On the West Coast, Livesay and Marriott, along with the poets Floris McLaren and Doris Ferne, who were frustrated with the lack of interest in modern poetry by the mainstream magazines that had since dominated Canadian literary culture that had long been plagued by masculinist, anti-bourgeois critiques from modernist circles and little magazine groups, decided to start their own modernist magazine. Granting editorial authority to their friend Alan Crawley, the magazine, titled Contemporary Verse, ran from 1941 until 1952 in Vancouver, and later Victoria. Notably, the West Coast-based magazine defined itself against both the overtly political focus of the little magazines of the 1930s, and the more exclusive stance initially fostered by the Preview group. 

While the perceived divisions between the Montreal and West Coast little magazines were arguably less pronounced than the modernists and the traditionalists in the 1920s, the dialogue between these representative figures of modern poetry—Layton from First Statement, and Marriott and Livesay from Contemporary Verse— provides an opportunity to reflect upon their competing philosophies and mutual ideals for developing a thriving, passionate, and engaged Canadian literary culture. The 1978 panel also invites a subtler analysis of the rhetorical strategies by which socially-engaged poets such as Livesay, Marriott, and Layton create literary history anew—as they reflexively construct and deconstruct, as well as mythologize and document, a Canadian modernist literary history that is both firmly entangled with the national imaginary, but still capable of speaking out against it.
